iRODS 5: Running the server (main) (#350)
irods/irods_docs: docs/getting_started/running.md

#

## Starting the Server

The iRODS server can be started in several ways, but the most common form is as a daemon process. This is accomplished by running the following as the service account user.

```bash
irodsServer -d
```

The server will perform various checks during startup to make sure it is safe to accept client requests. The most important check is validation of `server_config.json`. Failing validation will result in the server terminating immediately. All validation errors are reported via stderr.

Logs are written to syslog. See [The Server Log](../../system_overview/troubleshooting/#the-server-log) for information regarding syslog.

### Server PID File

> When running properly, the server writes its process ID (PID) to:

Author: State that this is the default location.

## Reloading Server Configuration

Unlike iRODS 4, iRODS 5 does not automatically load changes to `server_config.json`. Reloading the server's configuration requires sending a `SIGHUP` to the server. For example:

```bash
kill -HUP $(cat /var/run/irods/irods-server.pid)
```

On receiving `SIGHUP`, the server:

1. Validates `server_config.json` against its schema.
2. If validation **fails**, the reload is **rejected** and the previous configuration is used.
3. If validation **succeeds**, the server:

    - Updates its in-memory configuration
    - Sends `SIGTERM` to the delay server (if running)
    - Sends `SIGQUIT` to the agent factory
    - Waits for the agent factory to close its listening socket
    - Launches a new agent factory

## Using the Service Manager

> TODO

Author: Handle TODO

Author: Done.

```

This signal instructs agents to complete their current client request and terminate immediately (and cleanly), ending communication with the client.

### Graceful Shutdown

A graceful shutdown is triggered by sending a `SIGQUIT` to the main server process. For example:

```bash
kill -QUIT $(cat /var/run/irods/irods-server.pid)
```

This signal instructs agents to wait a limited amount of time before entering the [fast shutdown](#fast-shutdown) phase. During a graceful shutdown, agents will continue servicing client requests until the timeout. The timeout can be modified via the `graceful_shutdown_timeout_in_seconds` configuration property in `server_config.json`. See the section about [configuration](../../system_overview/configuration/#etcirodsserver_configjson) to learn more.

## Reloading Server Configuration

Unlike iRODS 4, iRODS 5 does not automatically load changes to `server_config.json`. Reloading the server's configuration requires sending a `SIGHUP` to the server. For example:

```bash
kill -HUP $(cat /var/run/irods/irods-server.pid)
```

On receiving `SIGHUP`, the server:

1. Validates `server_config.json` against its schema.

> 2. If validation **fails**, the reload is **rejected** and the previous configuration is used.

Reviewer: It feels like it would be good to mention that the server continues to run (i.e. nothing happens/changes in this case), but maybe the implication is strong enough.

Author: Will tweak so that it's a bit more explicit.

3. If validation **succeeds**, the server:

    - Updates its in-memory configuration
    - Sends `SIGTERM` to the delay server (if running)
    - Sends `SIGQUIT` to the agent factory
    - Waits for the agent factory to close its listening socket

>     - Launches a new agent factory

Reviewer: Does the agent factory spawn the delay server now? Regardless, maybe we should explicitly mention that a new delay server is launched.

Author: No. The main server process still launches the delay server.

Will include a statement about the delay server.

## Managing iRODS via the Service Manager

iRODS 5 has full compatibility with the service manager.

Given that systemd is the most widely used service manager, iRODS provides a service file template which should prove helpful to users looking to manage their iRODS server via systemd.

The service file template is located at `/var/lib/irods/packaging/irods.service.template`.

!!! Note

>     As a best practice, prefer modifying a copy of the template files. Doing that will help with avoiding issues with upgrades. Template files should always be treated as readonly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    As a best practice, modify a copy of the template files. Doing that will help with avoiding issues with upgrades. Template files should always be treated as read-only.
```

Author: Changed `files` -> `file` too.

Done.

Configuring systemd to use the service file is out of scope for this documentation and is left as an exercise for the reader. Below are a few links which you may find helpful.

- <https://systemd.io>
- <https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/latest/systemd.html>

## Test Mode

!!! Note
    This section is primarily for developers working on the server, plugins, and/or clients.

This mode instructs the server to write all log messages to an additional log file. Messages will still be written to stdout or syslog depending on how the server was launched. This secondary log file is located at the following location:

```bash
/var/lib/irods/log/test_mode_output.log
```

This mode was introduced to guarantee that log messages appear in the log file immediately. This mode is only meant to be used for testing. **The log file produced by this mode is never rotated.**

To enable this mode, you must first define the following environment variable in the iRODS service account:

```bash
export IRODS_ENABLE_TEST_MODE=1
```

> This environment variable makes various components (e.g. `IrodsController`) aware the server is to be operated in test mode. This is very important for tests which restart the server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This environment variable makes various components (e.g. `IrodsController`) aware that the server is to be operated in test mode. This is very important for tests which restart the server.
```

Author: Done.
